Hello? Carolyn, just talk.
Yeah.
Thanks.
Spread. Sort of.
Cool.
Well, good morning.
Good morning.
Thanks for joining us again. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning,
so we'll get straight into it.
Perfect. My colleague's name is-
I'm Denise Garland. I'm the advocacy manager at Retail NZ.
I think most of you have met before Carolyn, chief executive at Retail NZ.
Look,
really relatively briefly, in principle
support the intention of what the bill is trying to
achieve. There's just a couple of things that we really wanted to expand on.
And I think,
the
key thing we want to think about from a retail perspective is that there's 250,000
people work in retail. It's 90% of the workforce.
And from time to time, there will be a greater need and a
lesser need for more
migrants to come and fill roles within retail.
What we want to ensure is that there's both confidence in the system
from both
people coming into New Zealand, so from migrants wanting to come and work in
New Zealand, so that it's a safe place to work, and also
from a perspective of employers that they are
confident in the system as well. So,
I think the first thing really is about
the extension of being able to send someone back home
if they've committed a serious offense.
We think that's a
strong deterrent, hopefully, for people to do the right thing when they're in
New Zealand. And I think the
other piece that we were wanting to have, just a little bit of
input on was the
extension of the limitation period to six years for an infringement
offense seems a little bit disproportionate,
potentially, from where it sits at the moment.
So we felt that that
was a little bit long in terms of that
space.
Anything else you want to add on that?
Just on that, in terms of it's currently six months,
we acknowledge is probably too narrow.
Correct.
But six years, I think both, that puts a
lot of pressure on retailers in terms of their record
keeping. Six years and especially such a
sector that the workforce can
be quite a few people going through.
Yeah.
So keeping the records just to prove that they've been doing the
right thing for that entire period, if something was to
come up five and a half years later, we just think
that might be a little bit too onerous.
Acknowledging that, of course, employers should be
keeping good records. It just seems like
maybe there's a balance to be
struck there. The only other thing on that is
migrant exploitation is obviously very serious.
Mm-hmm.
And
any complaint should be actually acted on with quite a lot of urgency.
So there is also that expanding of the timeframe.
Just some concerns around whether that
urgency may be pulled back as a result.
Yeah.
That's great. Anything about the digital?
Anything else? We'll go to questions.
Yeah.
I think that's us.
Okay. Phil Twyford. Question.
Which parts of your membership
would have a lot of migrant workers?
Well, anyone that's in retail. And it depends,
the immigration settings change from time to time as to-
Mm-hmm
... who can come in, so it can be anyone.
So retail covers everything from
selling cars, to IT equipment, to
high-end
stores selling imported alcohol and things like that.
So you've got people with different levels of expertise that are coming in at
different times.
So there's no one part of the membership that has a particular
predominance, no?
No.
Okay.
Okay. Parmjeet Parmar.
Thank you. So, thank you for your submission, and you support the deportation
liabilities being extended. So just keen to understand for the
top tier of crime, the very serious crime, it is being extended from 10
to 20 years. What's your view of making it indefinite?
Why should it stop at 20 years?
We probably hadn't considered whether it should necessarily stop at 20
years. But certainly, for
serious crimes,
strong action needs to be taken. So that's a consideration for sure.
Thank you.
Dan
Rosenwood.
Yeah. Just about the six-year limitation period, I was just wondering
what you thought would be an appropriate length of time.
If six months is too narrow, six years is too broad,
where do you think that should sit?
Probably somewhere down the middle.
Yeah.
Down the middle.
Okay.
Three to four years probably seems relatively appropriate.
Mm-hmm.
But,
yeah, again, that's something I think that
people such as yourselves with a lot more knowledge and
will have been hearing from a lot more submitters might be able to
find the appropriate balance.
Thanks.
Okay. To Mindy's match.
Thank you. Just on the modernizing information-sharing provisions,
you talked about broadly supporting them.
What are some examples in which you think
broader information-sharing powers could be beneficial
for-
Or otherwise, do you think there's any instances in which it could be
problematic?
Yeah. I think in terms of that,
it's important that, I guess, appropriate
agencies are able to access
information under the appropriate settings and
correct settings, and understanding that sometimes these systems can be
quite
difficult to manage and having that information sharing
provision probably does allow for a more seamless flow
of information where appropriate.
However, we do think that there does need to be some
appropriate safeguards in place there.
It is
concerning. People's personal and private information is obviously
really important to them, and just ensuring that it's not
accessible just for anyone who
wants to
at these agencies, that there's appropriate reasons for that.
Yeah, and I think the thing I would add to that is that information sharing
is becoming something that's coming up more and more and more
across
a wide range of spaces. We're talking about how
identities are being able to be saved and stored and shared.
And so, the key thing is that actually there are appropriate safeguards
in place, and that the parameters are set in the right
boundaries for the right purposes.
So police might have more access to things for the reasons
that the
work that they do versus other agencies.
So it's really about making sure that, one, that the public can have
confidence in how information is shared and for what
purpose, and how it's stored safely.
Because this is a theme now that we're seeing through a lot
of bills that are coming up and a lot of conversations that are being had.
Thank you.
Thanks very much. Just going back to the six-year records
for a moment. You raised two points in
your submission. One was the time, the other was the concern
around
officers or officials not acting fast enough because there's a
wider time.
Is there a way that that could be addressed in relation
to how long officials have to raise an
issue with an employer once they've been made aware of it, noting that
it might take some time for employee exploitation to actually
raise-
Come to the surface
... you know, come to the surface.
Yeah. So I think it's the actioning of
once you're aware of the situation needs to be done and
needs to be expedited so that everyone is protected as much as they can.
Yeah.
But to your point, yes, we understand that sometimes investigations might
have taken some period of time or people don't put their hand up because of fear.
But definitely a short period of time to actually
action would be appropriate.
Okay. Yeah, because you might also find that
something comes to the surface, but actually there's a pattern, and that pattern
might go back years.
Yeah.
Okay. Any other questions, members? No. Thank you so much.
Thank you for your time.
Yeah.
Really appreciate your time this morning.
We now got the New Zealand Law Society on Zoom,
so hopefully they are ready, and we'll take them to the screen.
Good morning, Hannah. Welcome to the Education Workforce
Committee. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning. I'll hand over to you.
Please allow some time for questions.
Good morning. I believe my colleague-
Yes, Simon
... Simon should be joining us as well.
Good morning. Simon Graham, and I'm the convener of
the Law Society Immigration and
Refugee Committee. And I'm accompanied by my colleague,
Hannah Reid, who's a member of the Law Society Human Rights and
Privacy Committee.
I will first briefly speak about the Law Society's concerns regarding the
proposal to prevent temporary visa holders from appealing to
the Immigration and Protection Tribunal on humanitarian grounds.
My colleague Hannah will then address concerns about the proposal
to broaden immigration officers' powers to request
information and seize documents.
Before we launch into those points, I want to emphasize that while
we're addressing only two of the amendments in today's oral submissions,
our written submissions on the bill raise quite significant concerns
regarding most of the provisions in the bill.
The fact that we will not be addressing all of those concerns in the 10-minute slot
we have today does not mean that they're any less important.
I also want to note that the Law Society written submissions only address
provisions in the bill.
We understand that the select committee has also invited submissions on
parliamentary paper J24,
which proposes further amendments to the Immigration Act.
While our written submissions on the bill don't address those proposals,
we have provided a supplementary submission to the select committee clerk,
which sets out the feedback on those proposals.
We don't plan to discuss the feedback in today's hearing, but we would
be happy to provide written responses to any questions this committee
might have in relation to those supplementary submissions.
I'll now turn to Law Society's concerns about the proposal
to prevent certain visa holders from lodging
humanitarian appeals.
Several clauses in the bill seek to prevent all temporary visa
holders who commit a crime from appealing their deportation
liability to the IPT on humanitarian grounds.
We've identified these clauses in paragraph 6.1 of
our written submissions.To be clear, we don't
support these amendments.
The humanitarian appeals from temporary visa holders often
involve New Zealand citizens or resident children,
partners, parents, grandparents, and other close family
members,
as well as circumstances of serious hardship, tragedy,
or events the individual could not reasonably anticipate.
We are concerned that removal of these appeal rights for individuals could
cause serious injustice in some circumstances and undermine
principles of natural justice, proportionality, and judicial
oversight.
The materials relating to the bill suggest that the removal of these appeal
rights could be justified because there will remain
alternative avenues for individuals to be heard.
But as we explain in our written submissions, these alternative
avenues are simply not an adequate substitute for the
humanitarian appeals pathway, and they don't
mitigate the limits on the natural justice.
It's also
unlikely that these alternative avenues for
being heard would allow careful consideration of
humanitarian circumstances that are specific to each individual.
For example, one might be the best interests of the child
involved,
family life and family unity, as well as the length of time
and strength of an individual's connections and integration into New
Zealand.
These are matters that the IPT considers over the course of a humanitarian
appeal.
If these amendments prevent considerations of these matters, this could
mean that in some circumstances, New Zealand will fail to meet its
international obligation.
One very important example would be under the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child.
So for all these reasons, we oppose the removal of this humanitarian
appeal pathway and recommend these clauses be deleted from the
bill.
We think the humanitarian appeal pathway remains the most appropriate
process for independent, merits-based consideration
of whether it would be unjust or unduly harsh to deport a person.
Thank you, and I now hand you over to my colleague, Hannah Reid.
Thank you, Simon. I will speak to the Law Society's concerns
regarding Clauses 26, 27, 32, and
33,
which propose to broaden immigration officers' powers to request
information from individuals and potentially seize identity
documents. The Immigration Act in its current
form empowers immigration officers to request
information and seize identity documents where they have good
cause to suspect someone is liable for deportation
or turnaround. The bill proposes to broaden these
powers and would instead empower immigration officers to request
information or seize identity documents, not only when they have good
cause to suspect someone is liable for deportation or
turnaround, but also where they have good cause to suspect
someone may be liable for deportation or turnaround,
or is breaching, or may be breaching their visa
conditions.
The Law Society does not support these amendments for several reasons.
Those reasons are detailed in section 9 of our written submissions, but I'll just
highlight two of those now.
First, the exercise of these powers would constitute a search or
seizure for the purposes of Section 21 of the New Zealand Bill of Rights
Act.
The broad scope of the power and the absence of legislative
guidance on what might be considered a good cause or what
factors might help guide an assessment of good
cause
mean that there are only very limited constraints on the exercise of this
power, which could conceivably result in the
arbitrary or inconsistent exercise of these powers and
discrimination against certain individuals, as well as
disproportionately harsh outcomes for some individuals affected.
Second, we consider that these amendments also engage
various other rights, including the right not to be arbitrarily arrested
or detained, rights to natural justice under Section 27
of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act, and in some
circumstances, and depending on how the powers are exercised,
the rights contained in Section 19 of the Bill of Rights Act to be free from
discrimination,
and also the rights to privacy set out in the Privacy Act.
And we're concerned to see that the documents relating to the bill do not
appear to include any detailed analyses of what limits
are placed on these rights, or whether those limits might
be reasonable and justified.
So, the Law Society's recommendation is to delete these clauses of the bill.
However, in our written submissions, we also recommend some amendments
that might be made to
improve some of these clauses and to address some of these human rights
law concerns if this committee considers that those
clauses should remain. And these include, very briefly,
clarifying in some way in the bill what constitutes good cause to
suspect, including listing
potential factors that may be taken into account.
Secondly, requiring immigration officers to provide written reasons
for requesting information and the surrender of identity documents,
or at the very least, compelling immigration officers
to keep a written record
of the basis upon which they had good cause to suspect.
And establishing a process for individuals to challenge the surrender
of their identity documents should they find themselves in that
position.We're happy to answer any questions,
and equally happy to do so in writing, if we are time poor.
Thank you.
Thanks very much. We'll try and move through these quickly. Phil Twyford.
Question for Simon. Thank you for the submission.
When we've asked the minister about the removal of humanitarian appeal
rights, there's been two main responses.
One is, "Well, these people have outstayed their visa, they should just go."
And secondly, that there are these other alternatives that you've said are
inferior.
It might seem self-evident, but can you
tell us why the principle of access to natural justice, as
you've laid out in your submission, why is that important?
Why should that be a priority in terms of legal
process?
Well, it's fundamentally important when you're dealing with some mandatory
obligations. For example, we identified the rights of the child.
So when you're considering these particular interests, it's naturally
imperative that natural justice principles are applied to
consideration of those particular cases.
So it's self-evident, I would have thought, in those mandatory
considerations.
Okay. Thank you. Parmjeet Parmar.
Yes. Thank you. Thank you for your submission.
So this is about
your proposal five in your submission, which is make it easier for
an immigration officer to request information when there is good cause to
suspect someone may be unlawfully in New Zealand.
So you've-
It's not just New Zealand
... talked about safeguards. Very keen to understand
what kind of evidence you think immigration officers should have
before they could question somebody about
their legal status in New Zealand.
Sorry, just to clarify your question.
Were you asking what kind of evidence they already have before them?
Should have before they could question
somebody's status to decide if they're
legal or illegal.
Yes. So what sort of factors? That
would be a matter of sort of setting out factors, including
potentially having information about the individual
themselves and their status, or what type of work they might be
engaging in. It really is to set out a
series of factors that might prevent officers from taking into
account things like language, nationality, and ethnicity
as the sole basis for their good cause to
suspect. And that's to protect against potential discrimination
under
section 19 of the Bill of Rights Act.
Thanks very much. That's all we've got time for this morning.
So we're going to move to the Ombudsman,
who is here with us. Yeah.
Good morning, John. We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, including any time
for questions. So I'll hand over to you.
Kia ora tatou. I hope I won't take all of that time because
this is, from our perspective, a reasonably straightforward
submission, as you will have seen,
which deals primarily with the
implications of removing the
IPT
in relation to holders of temporary visas,
those who've been convicted of criminal offenses.
And the issue that we are raising in
that context is simply that while the Office of the
Ombudsman remains an office that will be able to be
utilized by
people in that position
to review actions, it is incorrect
to assume that the Office of the Ombudsman is a
substitute
for the IPT.
And there are a range of reasons for that.
First, the IPT is a specialist body
and the Ombudsman is not, although we have reasonably deep
experience in the immigration space.
Second, because the nature of our processes is very different.
We're inquisitorial
in the way in which we go about our business.
And third, because the Office of the Ombudsman does not have the
ability to make a binding determination,
while the IPT does. And so while in the
regulatory impact statement, there is a suggestion that the, or
maybe it's an inference actually, I'm not sure, that the
Ombudsman office would be a substitute effective for
the IPT.
We do not believe that is correct.
That is not to say that we're not able to engage
in the subject matter. We are, we do, and we will
continue to.
But it is simply to recognize to the committee that,
that assumption is not right.
The second point that we wanted to just raise with the
committee is the question of time frames
for the various processes that are currently
underway,
and the impact of the 14-day good reason process.
We believe that it would be desirable in the legislation
to give Immigration New Zealand more
specific ability to extend those
time periods,
where necessary or appropriate.
And those circumstances do occur.
I mean, we're aware of a number of cases
in which individuals have not been able, for a variety
of reasons, sometimes it's in terms of health conditions, sometimes it's
in terms of the complexity of their affairs,
to be able to put togetherThe
necessary material within 14 days.
And we believe that a discretion in those
circumstances would be helpful. The
third point that we would simply make to you
is that while the removal of the IPT
does leave open other avenues, those other
avenues will be quite complex and quite
difficult to navigate for people who may well be under significant
pressure in the circumstances that they are being asked to
navigate them. And what we have suggested, as you will have read in
our submission,
is that Immigration provides much fuller operational
guidance
to its officers about the human
rights obligations that, or
humanitarian obligations that they need to consider
in this context.
And also that they publicize
the avenues that are available in an overt and direct
way. So those were the specific points that we wanted to make in relation
to this legislation. Thank you.
Thanks so much. Ricardo Meneses March.
Thank you very much. On paragraph 17, you noted that you're confident in
affording the
potential increase without a significant impact in your operations.
What are the timeframes you normally have when it comes to, for example,
dealing one of those cases versus the IPT and when you do
arrive to an outcome, how does that compare to,
beyond the non-binding component-
Sure
... the sort of level of
information that you can provide in relationship to an outcome?
Yep. Sorry.
And how does your process defer to the IPT in terms of perhaps
timelines, transparency, and otherwise? Yeah.
Sure. So,
there's a fair bit in there, but let's talk about timeframes first
because I think that's probably the most important.
We endeavor to deliver 30%, I'm sorry,
70% of our work within 30 days.
We do
somewhat better than that.
In the current regime, we're at about
71%, 72%, something like that.
With more complex investigations, and some of these can get quite
complex-
Okay
... then I would expect it might go to six to eight sort of months,
something of that timeframe.
I think that's probably about the timeframe the IPT were working
to. I don't know whether we've got more specific knowledge on that, but I would
have said that sort of timeframe of eight months might be about
right. Is that about right? In terms of
process, as I've said, our process is inquisitorial.
Our process is private.
Our process is free, not to the taxpayer, but to the
complainant.
And so it is a different sort of process.
We don't bring a specialist capability
to the particular context, although many of our
investigators do have experience within the immigration
context. So it is a different process-
Mm-hmm
... than the IPT process. And yes, we do believe we can
absorb the additional 100 to 200
cases were they to come our way. Our point is simply that our
determinations, while because we stand in the manner of
this Parliament-
Mm-hmm
... they are generally complied with, are not binding-
... and will not give the complainants the
certainty of that position. And that my-
Just briefly on that,
on the non-binding stuff. So say that you go through a case, you agree
with the person bringing it forward.
Yeah.
Because it is non-binding, they would still have to eventually go to the minister,
I'm assuming. Or can you explain on that?
Yeah. So we are often-
Just sort of-
The common remedy is to recommend that Immigration New Zealand
reconsider the decision, taking in light the Ombudsman's
findings.
Okay.
Phil Twyford.
John, your office is the expert on dealing
with administrative and government processes
where citizens
are on the rough end of a poor process.
Yeah.
So you are the experts.
And the people who end up taking humanitarian
appeals are exactly that kind of person.
You're perfectly placed to judge
whether or not the status quo
or the proposed system with the removal of
humanitarian appeal rights is better.
Which is better for
natural justice and for
the sound kind of execution of
policy?
Well, I'm not here to say that we can't do this.
No, I'm asking for your opinion, John. What is better?
The status quo or what's being proposed? Mm-hmm.
Oh, well, in my view, the status quo is better than what is being
proposed.
Yeah. Thank you.
Any further questions? No. Thank you very
much for coming and joining us this morning.
I'm now going to move to Alistair Macleod, if I'm pronouncing that
correctly, online.
Alistair, welcome to the committee this morning.
We've got five minutes with you, including any time for questions. Over to you.
Great. Thank you very much. My name's Alastair McLarmont.
I'm an immigration lawyer based in Auckland.
I've been practicing for almost 30 years.
In my five minutes today, I'm going to focus solely on
the Section 26 of the Amendment Bill, which my colleague Hannah has
already talked to.
And again, I will repeat Simon's comments that
my choice of only speaking about Section 26 does not in any
way imply that I agree with any of the other sections of this
Amendment Bill. It's just limitations of time.
As my colleague Hannah has already talked about Section 26, I thought it might be
more useful if I change my approach in these five minutes and talk about
some practical examples about how I see that this
Section 26 is likely to work.
I'm going to refer solely to
the subclause of Section 26 that talks
about
people who may have breached their visa conditions
rather than overstaters. Because Section 26
substantially expands the power of immigration
officers to compel identifications under threats of arrest
and detention in circumstances that create a real
risk of disproportionate impact to migrant communities.
So, Section 26 is adding a subsection to
current Section 280, which is about
requiring identification for overstaters.
We're now in a situation where
we can see immigration officers are going to be able to
require individuals to show identification in
situations where they're not overstaying, they're here in New
Zealand lawfully undertaking their lawful activities.
They're not liable for arrest and removal from the country.
The worst consequences for them breaching visa conditions
is the receipt of a deportation liability notice in the mail.
Yet this section is giving immigration officers the power to
require identification, require these people
here lawfully to identify their country of birth, their
nationality, and if they fail to identify themselves, they may
be arrested and detained.
So this is a significant intrusion on the rights
of individuals who are here in New Zealand lawfully.
And I would argue that for the minister to
include these powers in this amendment, the minister needs to make the
case as to why this is necessary, and the
case has not been made. I notice on two occasions the minister
has been in the media to talk about these sections.
On both cases, she's talked about overstaters and not
about the intrusion on those people
lawfully in New Zealand holding valid visas.
One practical example I can give about how this is likely to
work is over the last month
in the Bay of Plenty Waikato region, Immigration New
Zealand conducted an operation called Operation Indigo,
which perhaps gives a suggestion as to what the purpose of this
operation was.
We had reports from clients in which they talked about
driving to their workplace, being stopped by the
police at a checkpoint, the police undertaking the standard
roadside checks concerning the vehicles, and the
driver's license, and then immigration officers being called over
by the police, questioning the people in the
car. The report that I had, there were four individuals going to
work. There was a New Zealand citizen, New Zealand resident, two
people holding valid work visas. They were asked
to provide their identification, to exit the vehicle,
to answer questions for half an hour on their way to work
about where they were working, why they were undertaking that work.
They were questioned about why there were fruit
buckets in the back of the work vehicle.
And this questioning was not just on the people with
the work visas. This was a New Zealand resident and a New
Zealand citizen. So you can see here that what this
section is likely to do is to give immigration officers
the power in workplaces and
whilst undertaking workplace
compliance. This is the only situation in which I
can really see that this section is going to apply.
So where immigration officers either go to a workplace or
around a workplace or
en route to a workplace, it's likely to be used to stop
people, to ask questions of individuals going
to those workplaces.
And of course, what ends up is going to happen is that there
are
obviously particular locations, times of day, the natures of the
vehicle, the types of industry involved, and I would
submit perceptions regarding the
immigration status of the individuals in those
workplaces.
We all know that there are particular
types of industries and workplaces in this country which are
dominated by particular migrant groups.
In the example I gave, we were talking about horticulture,
where there were a lot of Indian workers of all sorts of
visa status. We have construction, we have
hospitality, manufacturing, food production.
Quite often, these industries
include a number of migrants
from different ethnic backgrounds.
And I submit that what this subsection is going to do
is going to encourage immigration officers to target
particular ethnicities in those workplacesWhich
are dominated by those ethnic groups, and then
question people who are equally likely to be New Zealand
citizens and New Zealand residents about their work and their
immigration status, compelling them-
Alastair
... to provide identification.
Thanks, Alastair. That's all we've got time for this morning.
Appreciate you taking the time to submit to the committee.
Thank you.
Now I'm going to invite Rochelle up to the table.
Morning, Rochelle.
Hello.
Make this quicker. I know you've got a
lot
to.
We've got five minutes with you this morning, including time for questions.
Over to you.
Okay.
Good morning. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Rochelle Zettlemoyer. I'm a transgender woman from the
United States, and I'm currently seeking asylum here in New Zealand.
Today, I would like to offer a perspective of what this bill looks like from
this side of the immigration system, from the position of
someone who came here because I needed safety, and who is now questioning
whether the system wants to see me as a person to be protected or a
risk to be managed, because that distinction matters.
When you are seeking asylum, you're already living inside uncertainty.
You do not know what your future will look like.
You do not know whether the place you fled will keep getting worse,
what might happen to those you left behind.
You do not know whether the country you ran to will recognize the
danger you ran from. Every letter, every appointment,
every policy change can feel like the ground moving under your feet,
and this bill moves the ground in unsettling ways.
I find the proposed social media standards to be particularly unsettling.
Not only is social media how millions and millions of people connect around the
globe, but it is also a primary avenue for people to learn that their
own situation is not normal, not acceptable, and that they should
do something about it. Sometimes even that they can do something about
it. It's also my career.
My online presence is not a hobby. It's my work.
It's how I earn income, how I build community, how I advocate.
I run public-facing social media pages as my full-time career.
My identity as a trans woman is not separate from that work.
That matters because one of the more Orwellian things about this bill is the
possibility that public speech, media attention, or social media
activity could be treated as suspicious just because it comes from
an asylum seeker.
For some people, being public is optional.
For some people, that ship has already sailed.
Either way, publicity is also part of our safety net.
When marginalized people are threatened, visibility can be
dangerous, but silence always is.
We speak because we are trying to survive, trying to document what is
happening, trying to find community.
If an asylum seeker posts publicly about fear, discrimination, or
politics, safety or human rights, that should not automatically
be seen as a performance. For many of us, that is simply what
living honestly looks like. Visibility should not be treated as evidence
of bad faith. Silence never serves the oppressed,
only the oppressors.
I understand that immigration systems need rules.
I understand that governments need tools to respond to genuine harm.
I'm not asking New Zealand to abandon all of that.
What I'm asking is that enforcement not become the
organizing principle of the whole system,
because when the system is designed around suspicion,
vulnerable people feel that first.
Prior speaker talked about minority groups
being afraid to approach authorities, so I won't dive into that.
But you also want to bar people shifting
lanes,
withdrawing their asylum claims when they get some other opportunity.
And people's lives don't pause while they're in the asylum system.
People fall in love and get married.
They're offered work, become part of communities, and that should be
a good thing. If someone has another pathway
and can withdraw from the asylum system, doesn't that just free up
resources for the people that do need to continue through that
system?
And it just seems like the system here is creating nothing but
red tape, and that's why in my written submission, I called it
self-defeating, which is doubly so if you look to the future.
Because New Zealand is an aging country, and native Kiwis are
leaving in large numbers for opportunities elsewhere.
But communities need people. Everything from teachers, nurses, and
doctors to clerks, janitors, and bus drivers.
Economies need customers. Governments need
taxpayers.
I do not believe asylum seekers should have to prove our human value through
economic usefulness. People deserve safety and dignity simply because
they are human beings. But even on practical terms, New Zealand
cannot afford to make itself more hostile to people who want to come
and build lives here. I am not a threat to New Zealand's
future. I'm someone hoping to be part of it.
That is why I ask this committee to remember this.
The people affected by this bill are not abstractions.
We are not just files, risks, or categories.
We are people trying to survive the most frightening period of our lives
and build something stable on the other side.
We are also teens and children, and these laws
affect those people as well. In 2026, are you going to
say that if a teen talks about their life on social media,
that could jeopardize their family's entire asylum claim?
And what about children? If a young child is being abused or exploited
somehow, do you want them and their family afraid to go to the
authorities because, "Well, what if this complicates my asylum
claim?"So
my request is simple.
I request that this bill not proceed at all. It does far more harm than good.
Anything that would stay would need substantially
renovated. And just as a final note, as I said,
I'm from the United States.
I know exactly what happens when immigration
enforcement is allowed to ramp up unchecked.
I'm not saying New Zealand is the US.
I want New Zealand to be so much better, and this is a big
opportunity to choose to be better.
Thank you.
Thank you, Richelle, for the time you've taken to present to us this morning.
Really appreciate it. That's all we've got time for, so I'm going to now
invite
John Crocker and Sandra Grave from NZCTU
to the table.
We've got 10 minutes with you this morning, including any time for questions.
Over to you.
Kia ora
. Thank you for the time
to present to the select committee.
I'm just going to make my comments brief and allow John time
as our legal officer to speak
to this bill and some of the ramifications.
But I want to say we have very mixed views as the
organization representing over 300,000 workers in New Zealand,
mixed views about this bill because we think
it is very harsh on migrants and on the
migrant community.
And we don't think the sections of the bill that give a real
disproportionate effect on migrants should proceed.
But we do think
that our system needs work, particularly when it comes
to rogue employers and the penalties and
the remedies around rogue employers.
So we, I guess, are making a pitch that
we should take care and concern for migrant workers
rather than a very punitive
response, but also a response that takes away rights of
appeal.
And we would like to see you proceed with some of the work around
employers. So I'll hand over to John for the details.
Thank you. I'd just like to focus our submission on three points for the oral.
So the first is around the deportation liability
and reviewing this. What we're seeing is a system that is
disproportionate.
So, deportation, depending on how
integrated into New Zealand society someone is, can
have serious consequences. They can lose their flat,
employment. They could be going home in shame and debt.
And
the problem with the system at the moment, and it's not fixed in these proposals,
is that there's a big jump between being sentenced to
a crime with a potential sentence versus actually receiving that
sentence. So at the bottom end, we're looking at three months.
That can be very trite. No one's going to jail for three months.
It's often a fine, and residents could be facing
deportation for that. We're looking at the Policing Amendment
Bill, not moving on from an area--
Sorry, not giving details could result in a three-month sentence.
Someone could be deported. They could be heated in a protest and not give the
details, and get deported as a result.
At the far end, we're seeing actually being sentenced
significantly. If someone is sentenced to 10 years in prison, they have
done something very serious. That is a serious sentence.
They will have already lost employment,
their flat. They'll already be
distanced from friends and family.
So deportation in those circumstances is perfectly appropriate and extending--
removing the immunity for residents is fine, and we would like to see that, as we
mentioned,
also extended to those who exploit migrants.
In our experience, a lot of migrant exploitation
comes from other migrants, particularly residents in their community who have
established businesses and standing.
So we would like to see that increased in line with the others.
In terms of the rights of appeal,
we think this is the wrong solution to the problem.
From our reading, it looks like the Immigration
Protection Tribunal is under-resourced.
Its time frames are long, and the solution to that is to fix that
problem. This is shifting a problem
onto the minister judicial review or the ombudsman away from a
specialist appeals tribunal, which is best placed
to hear these subjects.
Pardon me, sorry. The other thing I'd like to mention is in the regulatory impact
statement, the appeals tribunal was finding in favor of the
appellant
33% of the time. That's a third. That's a significant number of decisions.
So you're either going to see one of two things.
People aren't going to access it, they're not going to get justice, or
the burden of that justice is going to transfer onto other parts of the system that
aren't as prepared or specialized to handle it.
And if we look at judicial review, that's a huge cost on the justice system.
So we'd like to not see that one go ahead.
And lastly, just in line with the previous submitter, I'd like to talk
about the expanded powers for
the compliance around searches and so on.
When we looked at the regulatory impact statement, the examples given
were very poor. They were comical.
There was someone at work in a work uniform and they should be subject to
questioning. That's ridiculous.
And I think what it shows in having prepared this is
that
while it wouldn't be possible to expand powers because one of the examples
obviously needed to be solved, it shows that the department lacks a level of
maturity around this. When these are the examples put
forward, they're absurd andMaybe you can do that in the future, but a
lot of work needs to be done before we can get anywhere near that place.
So,
we'll leave it on those three, and time for any questions.
Kind of mini as much.
Thank you very much. Just on the issue around being able to best predict
potential visa breaches. So,
how often do the members you
work with who are migrants are required to carry
identification in the workplace?
And
what are some potential visa breaches that you're concerned that could be
targeted
with, for example, working 21 hours instead of 20 when they're a student?
Would you mind commenting on some of those two things?
And that raises because obviously the expectation is that
people should be targeted in situations where they're expected to carry an ID.
But in how many of the workplaces that you have members in or from your
unions that
you would expect that they have to carry an ID when they're in the workplace?
Look, from an employment point of view, it's really only a requirement when
driving.
There can be other situations, but most times people can show up to
work if they leave their wallet at home, it's no big deal, right?
That's not going to prevent them from doing their job.
The employer will have records of them anyway.
Look, in terms of those breaches, that's exactly what we're talking
about, that someone will be on a migrant visa, are often working for another
migrant, and then there will be pressure to breach that.
Students are a great example. And that puts people in a vulnerable
position because
they're damned if they do and damned if they don't.
They can face deportation for reporting their employer, and then if they
breach, they can face deportation for being caught.
So it puts them in a very, very difficult position.
Grant McEllig.
Yeah. Good morning. Thank you for your submission.
I'm just wondering, do you have a view on situations
where you've got people who are overstaying,
or sorry, correction, here illegally working,
holding down jobs that could be held by, say, unemployed New
Zealanders who are
New Zealand citizens?
I think the broader
position would be that people shouldn't be here illegally. That's unlawful.
Should not be.
Yeah.
Look, I think
it's not impossible to have exceptions.
People can make mistakes, things can go wrong in the system, so we shouldn't
necessarily bring the hammer down on people.
But broadly it's unlawful, and we'd
prefer to see them not doing that.
Thank you.
Christian.
Yeah, just-
Phil Twyford
... since thinking about
the overall impact of this suite of
changes on workers
and your members.
A list of measures that essentially tighten the system up, make it more
punitive, take away natural justice
rights,
and expose people to greater penalties.
What overall effect does that have on
workers, do you think?
I think
you're cracking down on people who are already vulnerable.
Mm-hmm.
I think one of them, when we look at the appeals, is actually about an
under-resourced system. People can get frustrated by wait lengths.
We heard about asylum seekers shifting around.
So
the immigration system is far from perfect.
This
doesn't look like the right approach to solving that problem.
We'd rather see something more targeted, something about more supporting the system
and the people in it, rather than coming down punitively.
With the exception of those who exploit migrants. We agree with that.
Mm-hmm.
I think,
Phil, the question around what this does to a system
overall,
we have a system where employees, where workers have to be able to
talk about health and safety. They have to be able to talk about their wages.
They have to be able to talk about what happens when they are exploited.
If these changes go ahead, I think we are going to see people very
reluctant to speak up, to look after themselves or their
colleagues. We're going to see a real system of fear
starting to come in. We're already seeing that a bit.
Well, you do see it a lot with migrant labor because they are really
concerned that everybody's watching them,
and they don't feel that they can even join unions perhaps, because
that's a place where they can get protection.
But they fear if they join a union, either at home, their families will be
targeted, or here now, that the employer will target them
and they'll end up
as a person who is seen as breaching rules.
So I think we don't want a system in New Zealand.
We want our citizens, we want migrants who live here to feel they
are welcome, that they can use the
law well and look after themselves and those around them.
And I think what you're suggesting is what's going to happen.
We're going to see a further shutting down of a very vulnerable
community, and that is not good for anyone.
Yeah. I think we've just mentioned the Achilles heel in the migrants.
So that's all we've got time for
now this morning. Appreciate you
visiting committee. Members, we're moving into private, so if we
can